Exercise 6.1



Exercise 6.2



Exercise 6.3
1. Fill the 5-qt jug.
2. Fill the 3-jug from the 5-jug.
3. Pour out the 3 quarts.
4. Pour the leftover 2 quarts into the 3-jug.
5. Fill the 5-jug.
6. Pour 1 qt fromo 5-jug into 3-jug (until it is full).
7. There are four quarts in the 5-jug.


Exercise 6.4
(There are 1 or more blue-eyed people).
Inductive reasoning:

1. If there is 1 blue-eyed person, they immediately know they are blue-eyed
because they can see everyone else. They leave on the first flight.
(Nobody else leaves because they expect blue-eyed to leave on the first
flight if he doesn't see any other blue-eyed people, but to wait if
he does see some.)

2. If there are 2 blue-eyed, each of them is waiting for the other to leave
on the first flight. They don't, so each knows they're blue-eyed too.
They leave on the second flight. (Whereas nobody else leaves on the second flight,
because they are waiting to see whether the 2 blue-eyed people leave on the second flight).

...

If "k blue-eyed people would leave on kth flight" is true,
then "(k+1) blue-eyed people would leave on (k+1)th flight" is true,
because each of them is waiting for the other k people to leave on the kth flight.

So N people would leave on Nth flight.



Exercise 6.5




Extra problem:

There are 100 prisoners. On Tuesday the jailer says:
Tomorrow I'll blindfold you all, put either a white or black hat on each of you,
line you up facing one side, and take off the blindfolds. Nobody can see
his own hat, only the people in front of him (not behind).
You are each allowed to say only one word, "white" or "black."
(You may yell it so everyone can hear). No tricky stuff with tone of voice. If that agrees
with your hat color, you may go free. Otherwise you are executed. You
may decide a strategy together beforehand but once the "exercise" begins you may
say only the one word.

What should the prisoners' strategy be, and how many prisoners can be saved?

Answer:
The 100th person (who can see the other 99) should go first.
He should count the number of white hats among the 99. If it is even,
he should say "white," if odd, then "black." The others will understand
this code, arranged beforehand.
(He may or may not be executed; there is no way to know his hat color
and he is sacrificing himself to give information to the other prisoners.)
The 99th person will be able to count whether the 98 hats in front of him
have even or odd white hats. He can combine that with person 100's answer
to work out his own hat color.
Person 98 knows that 99 was correct, so he knows 98 hat colors and is in the same
position as person 99, and can answer correctly.
Similarly, all 99 people can answer their own hat color correctly one by one, from
back to front.


